GNU Emacs Installation Guide
Copyright (C) 1992, 1994, 1996-1997, 2000-2026 Free Software Foundation,
Inc.
See the end of the file for license conditions.


This file contains general information on building GNU Emacs.  If you
are building an Emacs release tarball on a Unix or a GNU system, the
instructions in this file should be sufficient.  For other
configurations, we have additional specialized files:

  . INSTALL.REPO if you build from a Git checkout
  . nt/INSTALL if you build for MS-Windows
  . nextstep/INSTALL if you build for GNUstep/macOS
  . java/INSTALL if you build for Android
  . msdos/INSTALL if you build for MS-DOS


BASIC INSTALLATION

On most Unix systems, you build Emacs by first running the 'configure'
shell script.  This attempts to deduce the correct values for
various system-dependent variables and features, and find the
directories where certain system headers and libraries are kept.
In a few cases, you may need to explicitly tell configure where to
find some things, or what options to use.

'configure' creates a 'Makefile' in several subdirectories, and a
'src/config.h' file containing system-dependent definitions.
Running the 'make' utility then builds the package for your system.

Building Emacs requires GNU make, <https://www.gnu.org/software/make/>.
On most systems that Emacs supports, this is the default 'make' program.

Here's the procedure to build Emacs using 'configure' on systems which
are supported by it.  In some cases, if the simplified procedure fails,
you might need to use various non-default options, and maybe perform
some of the steps manually.  The more detailed description in the other
sections of this guide will help you do that, so please refer to those
sections if you need to.

  1.  Obtain and unpack the Emacs release, with commands like this:

		 wget https://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/emacs/emacs-VERSION.tar.xz
		 tar -xf emacs-VERSION.tar.xz

      where VERSION is the Emacs version number.

  2a. 'cd' to the directory where you unpacked Emacs and invoke the
      'configure' script:

		 ./configure

  2b. Alternatively, create a separate directory, outside the source
      directory, where you want to build Emacs, and invoke 'configure'
      from there:

		 SOURCE-DIR/configure

      where SOURCE-DIR is the top-level Emacs source directory.

  2c. If you don't have write access to the default directory where
      Emacs and its data files will be installed, specify an alternative
      installation directory:

		 ./configure --prefix=/SOME/OTHER/DIRECTORY

      where /SOME/OTHER/DIRECTORY is a directory writable by your user,
      for example, a subdirectory of your home directory.

  3. When 'configure' finishes, it prints several lines of details
     about the system configuration.  Read those details carefully
     looking for anything suspicious, such as wrong CPU and operating
     system names, wrong places for headers or libraries, missing
     libraries that you know are installed on your system, etc.

     If you find anything wrong, you may have to pass to 'configure'
     one or more options specifying the explicit machine configuration
     name, where to find various headers and libraries, etc.
     Refer to the section DETAILED BUILDING AND INSTALLATION below.

     If 'configure' didn't find some image support libraries, such as
     Xpm and jpeg, refer to "Image support libraries" below.

     If the details printed by 'configure' don't make any sense to
     you, but there are no obvious errors, assume that 'configure' did
     its job and proceed.

  4. Invoke the 'make' program:

		 make

  5. If 'make' succeeds, it will build an executable program 'emacs'
     in the 'src' directory.  You can try this program, to make sure
     it works:

		 src/emacs -Q

     To test Emacs further (intended mostly to help developers):

		 make check

  6. Assuming that the program 'src/emacs' starts and displays its
     opening screen, you can install the program and its auxiliary
     files into their installation directories:

		 make install

  You are now ready to use Emacs.  If you wish to conserve space,
  you may remove the program binaries and object files from the
  directory where you built Emacs:

		 make clean

  You can delete the entire build directory if you do not plan to
  build Emacs again, but it can be useful to keep for debugging.
  If you want to build Emacs again with different configure options,
  first clean the source directories:

		make distclean

  Note that the install automatically saves space by compressing
  (provided you have the 'gzip' program) those installed Lisp source (.el)
  files that have corresponding .elc versions, as well as the Info files.

  You can read a brief summary about common make targets:

                make help


ADDITIONAL DISTRIBUTION FILES

* Complex Text Layout support libraries

On GNU and Unix systems, Emacs needs optional libraries to correctly
display such complex scripts as Indic and Khmer, and also for scripts
that require Arabic shaping support (Arabic and Farsi).  If the
HarfBuzz library is installed, Emacs will build with it and use it for
this purpose.  HarfBuzz is the preferred shaping engine, both on Posix
hosts and on MS-Windows, so we recommend installing it before building
Emacs.  The alternative for GNU/Linux and Posix systems is to use the
"m17n-db", "libm17n-flt", and "libotf" libraries.  (On some systems,
particularly GNU/Linux, these libraries may be already present or
available as additional packages.)  Note that if there is a separate
'dev' or 'devel' package, for use at compilation time rather than run
time, you will need that as well as the corresponding run time
package; typically the dev package will contain header files and a
library archive.  On MS-Windows, if HarfBuzz is not available, Emacs
will use the Uniscribe shaping engine that is part of the OS.

Note that Emacs cannot support complex scripts on a TTY, unless the
terminal includes such a support.  However, most modern terminal
emulators, such as xterm, do support such scripts.
